Custom scopes, third party applications and FusionAuth (#3024)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/blog/custom-scopes-in-third-party-applications.mdx

## The Setup
For the purposes of this blog, you will be reading about a fictional up-and-coming application named [Budget Buddy](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-example-ruby-on-rails-custom-scopes) and the APIs created for [Change Bank](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CXDxNCzUspM). Change Bank is the fictional company used in many FusionAuth quickstarts. It is important to note that Change Bank uses FusionAuth as its identity provider and Budget Buddy uses a separate system.

Change Bank has [existing APIs](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-quickstart-ruby-on-rails-api) for their application. They provide methods for making change and alerting the authorities of an incident should it occur. The owner of the up-and-coming Budget Buddy application has reached out to the owner of Change Bank. He has asked if it would be possible to integrate with Change Bank by allowing Budget Buddy users to see their Change Bank balance in the Budget Buddy application. They agreed and now Budget Buddy has become a third-party application for Change Bank.

How is this implemented?

<Aside type="note">

> Please note that the custom scope feature is only available in an Essentials or Enterprise plan. You can visit the [pricing page](https://fusionauth.io/pricing) to learn more.

Author: ```suggestion
Please note that the custom scope feature is only available in an Essentials or Enterprise plan. You can visit the [pricing page](/pricing) to learn more.
```

---
publish_date: 2024-04-24

> title: "Custom Scopes, Third Party Applications, And FusionAuth"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Custom Oauth Scopes, Third Party Applications, And FusionAuth"
```

> description: 'How to use custom scopes in a third party application with FusionAuth.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'How to use custom OAuth scopes in a third party application with FusionAuth.'
```

authors: Mark Robustelli
image: /img/blogs/custom-scopes-in-third-party-applications/custom-spcopes-blog-header.png
categories: Tutorial
tags: scopes, oauth
excerpt_separator: "{/* more */}"
---

import Aside from '/src/components/Aside.astro';
import {RemoteCode} from '@fusionauth/astro-components';
import LoginArchitecture from '/src/diagrams/blog/custom-scopes-in-third-party-applications/login-diagram.astro';

> What are third party applications and custom scopes? How would I implement them using FusionAuth?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What are third party applications and custom scopes? How would I implement OAuth scopes using FusionAuth?
```

{/* more */}

> In today's world of API enabled applications, it is very common to open up the APIs of your application to other applications. Not just open the APIs to other applications that you and your team have created but open the APIs to applications created by other entities. These applications that consume your APIs are known as third party applications. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In today's API-driven world, it's common to open up your application's APIs to others, including those created by external parties. These applications that consume your APIs are known as third-party applications.
```

> You will want to ensure the API calls to your application are secured. This is where scopes come into play. Similar to roles for a user, custom scopes can be created for applications. This ensures your APIs are only being called by applications you grant access to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Securing API calls to your application is crucial. This is where scopes come into play. Similar to user roles, custom scopes can be created for applications, ensuring your APIs are only accessed by authorized parties.
```

## The Setup
For the purposes of this blog, you will be reading about a fictional up-and-coming application named [Budget Buddy](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-example-ruby-on-rails-custom-scopes) and the APIs created for [Change Bank](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CXDxNCzUspM). Change Bank is the fictional company used in many FusionAuth quickstarts. It is important to note that Change Bank uses FusionAuth as its identity provider and Budget Buddy uses a separate system.

> Change Bank has [existing APIs](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-quickstart-ruby-on-rails-api) for their application. They provide methods for making change and alerting the authorities of an incident should it occur. The owner of the up-and-coming Budget Buddy application has reached out to the owner of Change Bank. He has asked if it would be possible to integrate with Change Bank by allowing Budget Buddy users to see their Change Bank balance in the Budget Buddy application. They agree and now Budget Buddy has become a third party application for Change Bank.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Change Bank has [existing APIs](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-quickstart-ruby-on-rails-api) for their application. They provide methods for making change and alerting the authorities of an incident should it occur. The owner of the up-and-coming Budget Buddy application has reached out to the owner of Change Bank. He has asked if it would be possible to integrate with Change Bank by allowing Budget Buddy users to see their Change Bank balance in the Budget Buddy application. They agreed and now Budget Buddy has become a third-party application for Change Bank.
```

How is this implemented?

> ## FusionAuth Setup For Third Party Application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## FusionAuth Setup For Third-Party Application
```

Change Bank is lucky because they use FusionAuth and it supports custom scopes as of version 1.50.0.

> The first thing they will need to do is create the Budget Buddy application in their FusionAuth instance. Notice that the Budget Buddy Client Id starts with `4581` and the Change Bank Client Id starts with `e9fd`. Change Bank will need to provide the Budget Buddy organization with the Client Id that begins with `4581`, the Client Secret for the Budget Buddy application, and the Change Bank login url. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first thing they will need to do is create the Budget Buddy application in their FusionAuth instance. Notice that the Budget Buddy Client Id starts with `4581` and the Change Bank Client Id starts with `e9fd`. Change Bank will need to provide the Budget Buddy organization with the Client Id that begins with `4581`, the Client Secret for the Budget Buddy application, and the Change Bank login URL. 
```

![Adding Budget Buddy Application.](/img/blogs/custom-scopes-in-third-party-applications/new-budget-buddy-application.png)

> Then, they will need to configure the application as a third party application by updating the `Scopes` settings for the application. They should set the Relationship to `Third-party. The application is external to the authorization server.`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, they will need to configure the application as a third-party application by updating the `Scopes` settings for the application. They should set the Relationship to `Third-party. The application is external to the authorization server.`
```

![Budget Buddy Scopes Settings.](/img/blogs/custom-scopes-in-third-party-applications/budget-buddy-scopes.png)

Next, they will need to add the custom scope for the Budget Buddy application. In this case, the custom scope `balance:read` has been created. This will be the scope that the Change Bank API will look for when determining if the application can retrieve the balance.

![Budget Buddy Custom Scopes.](/img/blogs/custom-scopes-in-third-party-applications/budget-buddy-custom-scopes.png)

## Updating Change Bank API

Now all that is left is to create the `get-balance' endpoint for the API. To accomplish this, a new controller (along with a bit of internal plumbing) is added to the API project. 

<Aside type="note">
The APIs use the [rack-jwt](https://github.com/FusionAuth/rack-jwt) Gem to help with parsing and validation of the token that will be sent with the API request. The 'internal plumbing' of the API is beyond the scope (no pun intended) of this blog. For more details, please see the [FusionAuth API Quickstart for Ruby on Rails](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-quickstart-ruby-on-rails-api). 
</Aside>

> The important part for the code in the controller is that it checks for the correct Budget Buddy Client ID and checks for the scope `balance:read`.  If those values are confirmed, then a balance is returned. If this were a real application, it would also retrieve the `change_bank_user_id` and look up the actual balance for the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The important part of the code in the controller is that it checks for the correct Budget Buddy Client Id and checks for the scope `balance:read`.  If those values are confirmed, then a balance is returned. If this were a real application, it would also retrieve the `change_bank_user_id` and look up the actual balance for the user.
```

![Budget Buddy Connect to Change Bank.](/img/blogs/custom-scopes-in-third-party-applications/budget-buddy-get-balance-start.png)

When the user clicks connect, they will be prompted for a Change Bank login. Here they must enter their username and password for the Change Bank application.

<Aside type="note">
Behind the scenes, Budget Buddy uses [OmniAuth](https://rubygems.org/gems/omniauth) to help with the OAuth login flow for Change Bank.  Again, this is beyond the scope of this blog. For further details please see the [FusionAuth Custom Scopes Example Application](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-example-ruby-on-rails-custom-scopes)
</Aside>

![Change Bank Login.](/img/blogs/custom-scopes-in-third-party-applications/change-bank-login.png)

After the user logs in, they will be presented with consent options. This allows the user to choose what Change Bank information and actions the Budget Buddy application has access to. In this case, the `Allow Budget Buddy to read your Change Bank balance` consent grants the `balance:read` scope.

![Change Bank Consent.](/img/blogs/custom-scopes-in-third-party-applications/change-bank-consent.png)

> When the user allows the consents, Budget Buddy will be able to read the user's Change Bank balance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the user allows the consent, Budget Buddy can read the user's Change Bank balance.
```

![Budget Buddy Read Change Bank Balance.](/img/blogs/custom-scopes-in-third-party-applications/budget-buddy-balance-read.png)

From here the user can choose to disconnect Change Bank from the Budget Buddy application or leave it connected. As long as Budget Buddy has a valid authorization token it will be allowed to read the user's balance from the Change Bank APIs.

## Conclusion

> It can be a little confusing with the screen shots all showing the local host due to the way Safari renders the URL. In the example application, there are actually two applications (Change Bank API / Budget Buddy Web App) and FusionAuth is the IdP for the Change Bank applications. In a real world example, Change Bank would likely have a web application as well. A diagram of what that may look like would be as follows: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can be confusing with the screenshots all showing the local host due to the way Safari renders the URL. In the example application, there are two applications (Change Bank API / Budget Buddy Web App) and FusionAuth is the IdP for the Change Bank applications. In a real-world example, Change Bank would likely also have a web application. A diagram of what that may look like would be as follows: 
```

<LoginArchitecture />

> It should be clear that Budget Buddy is its own application with its own identity provider. In the case that it requests the users Change Bank balance, the Change Bank login flow would be initiated against the Change Bank IdP. The user would then login and grant Budget Buddy the necessary consents to retrieve the balance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It should be clear that Budget Buddy is its own application with its own identity provider. In the case that it requests the user's Change Bank balance, the Change Bank login flow would be initiated against the Change Bank IdP. The user would then log in and grant Budget Buddy the necessary consent to retrieve the balance.
```
